808/about executors (#974)
grafana/k6-docs: src/data/markdown/translated-guides/en/02 Using k6/14 Scenarios/00 About scenarios/02 VU allocation.md

---
title: VU allocation
excerpt: How k6 allocates VUs in the open-model, arrival-rate executors
---

In arrival-rate executors, as long as k6 has VUs available, it starts iterations according to your target rate.
The ability to set iteration rate comes with a bit more configuration complexity: you must pre-allocate a sufficient number of VUs.
In other words, before the tests runs, you must both:

> - Configure load (as iteration per unit of time)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Configure load (as new iterations per unit of time)
```

> - Ensure that you've scheduled enough VUs.

Reviewer: "Scheduled" is incorrect here, "allocated" or "initialized"

Read on to learn about how k6 allocates VUs in the arrival-rate executors.

## Pre-allocation in arrival-rate executors

As [open-model](/using-k6/scenarios/about-scenarios/open-vs-closed/#open-model) scenarios, arrival-rate executors start iterations according to a configured rate.
For example, you can configure arrival-rate executors to start 10 iterations each second, or minute, or hour.
This behavior is opposed to the closed-model scenarios, in which VUs wait for one iteration to finish before starting another

Each iteration need needs a VU to run it.

> Because k6 VUs are single threaded, like other JS runtimes, a VU can only run the event loop of a single iteration at a time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because k6 VUs are single threaded, like other JavaScript runtimes, a VU can only run a single iteration (and its event loop) at a time.
```

To ensure you have enough, you must pre-allocate a sufficient number.

In your arrival-rate configuration, three properties determine the iteration rate:
- `rate` determines how many iterations k6 starts.

> - `timeUnit` determines how frequently it starts the number of iterations.

Reviewer: Having these 2 in different lines, with a separate explanation for each, is more confusing than helpful in my opinion. The current disjointed explanation is both longer, more confusing and less correct than "k6 will try to start `rate` iterations evenly spread across a `timeUnit` (default `1s`) interval of time"

> - `preAllocatedVUs` sets the number of VUs to use to reach the target iterations per second.
> In practice, determining the right number of iterations might take some trial and error,
> as the necessary VUs entirely depends on how quickly the SUT can process iterations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `preAllocatedVUs` sets the number of VUs k6 will initialize before the test starts.
In practice, determining the right number of VUs to be able to reach the target iterations rate might take some trial and error,
as the necessary VUs entirely depends on what your iteration code looks like and how quickly the system-under-test can process requests.
```

```javascript
export const options = {
  scenarios: {
    constant_load: {
      executor: "constant-arrival-rate",
      preAllocatedVUs: 4,
      rate: 8,
      timeUnit: "1m",
    },
  },
};
```

<Blockquote mod="attention" title="">

> In cloud tests, **both `preAllocatedVUs` and `maxVUs` count against your subscription.**

Reviewer: Another problem - you mention `maxVUs` here, but we haven't mentioned maxVUs anywhere before in this document... This was one of the reasons for my longer explanation that you discarded, it had a paragraph with a cohesive explanation for both `preAllocatedVUs` and `maxVUs`

Author: I'm still kind of of the opinion that `maxVUs` shouldn't be mentioned anywhere :-). What I'll do is just make the first admonition only about `preAllocatedVUs`, and then a second admonition in the `maxVUs` section. It's not very elegant, but it doesn't cram so much information together.

Reviewer: Again, if I could rewrite history, maxVUs probably would not exist :sweat_smile:  But now that it exists, we should try to make it as clear as possible how it function and why it might not be a good idea to use. 

An admonition only for `preAllocatedVUs` doesn't make sense, this is how cloud subscriptions normally work, i.e. no admonition needed just for it.

And if we want to tuck `maxVUs` only at the end of the document, somewhat out of sight (which I don't necessarily mind), then we should only have an admonition there.

Author: Here's how I've handled it: two admonitions. No points for subtlety, but I don't think anyone can say we're being sneaky:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/47385188/212304282-b337ec55-3b54-409d-b466-ffa325471d49.png)

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/47385188/212304169-5155db43-48a6-4a72-8908-32d544c96357.png)

Reviewer: Nobody will read the text you have highlighted in the middle of that paragraph :sweat_smile: People will just see the two admonitions and get the impressions that in the cloud we will charge them for `preAllocatedVUs + maxVUs`

Author: Point taken. With https://github.com/grafana/k6-docs/pull/974/commits/19784d4173ca6376585990b447f1b39cbcc58706, it looks like this:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/47385188/212308372-f85b547e-549d-4d40-9845-3b748d8776ac.png)

What's more, as the test goes on, iteration duration likely increases.
If response times slow so much that k6 lacks the VUs to start iterations at the desired rate,
the allocation might be insufficient and k6 will drop iterations.

To determine your strategy, you can run tests locally and gradually add more pre-allocated VUs.
As dropped iterations can also indicate that the system performance is degrading, this early experimentation can provide useful data on its own.

## You probably don't need `maxVUs`

The arrival-rate executors also have a `maxVUs` property.
If you set it, k6 runs in this sequence:
1. Pre-allocate the `preAllocatedVUs`.
1. Run the test, trying to reach the target iteration rate.
1. If the target exceeds the available VUs, allocate another VU.
1. If the target still exceeds available VUs, continue allocating VUs until reaching the number set by `maxVUs`.

Though it seems convenient, you should avoid using `maxVUs` in most cases.
Allocating VUs has CPU and memory costs, and allocating VUs as the test runs **can overload the load generator and skew results**.

> If you're running in k6 Cloud, the `maxVUs` will count against your subscription.

Author: ```suggestion
If you're running in k6 Cloud, the `maxVUs` will count against your subscription.
This is because k6 must allocate sufficient resources for `maxVUs` to be initialized, even if they never are.
```

---
title: VU allocation
excerpt: How k6 allocates VUs in the open-model, arrival-rate executors
---

In arrival-rate executors, as long as k6 has VUs available, it starts iterations according to your target rate.
The ability to set iteration rate comes with a bit more configuration complexity: you must pre-allocate a sufficient number of VUs.
In other words, before the tests runs, you must both:
- Configure load (as iteration per unit of time)

> - Ensure that you've scheduled enough VUs.

Author: ```suggestion
- Ensure that you've allocated enough VUs.
```

- `timeUnit` determines how frequently it starts the number of iterations.
- `preAllocatedVUs` sets the number of VUs to use to reach the target iterations per second.

In short, while `rate` and `timeUnit` set the target iterations per second, **you must allocate enough VUs to reach this target.**
By pre-allocating VUs, k6 can initialize the VUs necessary for the test before the test runs,
which ensures that the CPU cost of allocation doesn't interfere with test execution.

```javascript
export const options = {
  scenarios: {
    constant_load: {
      executor: "constant-arrival-rate",
      preAllocatedVUs: 4,
      rate: 8,
      timeUnit: "1m",
    },
  },
};
```

<Blockquote mod="attention" title="">

In cloud tests, **both `preAllocatedVUs` and `maxVUs` count against your subscription.**

When planning a test, consider doing a trial initialization on a local machine to ensure you're allocating VUs efficiently.

</Blockquote>

## How k6 uses allocated VUs

Before an arrival-rate scenario starts, k6 first initializes the number of `preAllocatedVUs`.
When the test runs,
the number of available `preAllocatedVUs` determines how many iterations k6 can start.

> k6 tries to reach the target iterations per second, and one of two things can happen.
> 
> | If the executor       | Then..                                                                                                                                 |
> |-----------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
> | Has enough VUs        | the extra VUs are "idle," ready to be used when needed.                                                                                |
> | Has insufficient VUs. | k6 emits a [`dropped_iterations` metric](/using-k6/scenarios/about-scenarios/dropped-iterations) for each iteration that it can't run. |
> 
> ## Iteration duration affects the necessary allocation
> 
> The necessary allocation depends on the iterations duration.

Author: ```suggestion
k6 tries to reach the target iterations per second,
and one of two things can happen:

| If the executor       | Then..                                                                                                                                 |
|-----------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Has enough VUs        | the extra VUs are "idle," ready to be used when needed.                                                                                |
| Has insufficient VUs. | k6 emits a [`dropped_iterations` metric](/using-k6/scenarios/about-scenarios/dropped-iterations) for each iteration that it can't run. |

## Iteration duration affects the necessary allocation

The necessary allocation depends on the iteration duration:
```

Longer durations need more VUs.

> In a "perfect world", you could estimate the number of pre-allocated VUs with this formula

Author: ```suggestion
In a perfect world, you could estimate the number of pre-allocated VUs with this formula:
```

```
preAllocatedVUs = [median_iteration_duration * rate] + constant_for_variance
```

In the real world, if you know _exactly_ how long an iteration take, you likely don't need to run a test.

> What's more, as the test goes on, iteration duration will likely increase.

Author: ```suggestion
What's more, as the test goes on, iteration duration likely increases.
```

---

> title: VU allocation

Reviewer: "VU allocation" seems a bit misleading, since we are only talking about arrival-rate scenarios

```suggestion
title: Arrival-rate VU allocation
```

or maybe even 

```suggestion
title: Arrival-rate configuration
```

Author: Need to think about this.
"Arrival-rate configuration" probably opens the door to more topics, like using options. That's not bad, but it may mean there's a better place to put this (not blocking for this PR). Is there any reason readers should know about non-arrival rate allocation? If so, maybe we could add it. If not, maybe it doesn't matter to document.

Not sure. It's a good point though.

Author: Now that I've thought about it, I don't want to go with "Arrival-rate configuration" because that should include Graceful stop and maybe more, which opens a whole new round of content structure. It's nice to keep info atomic.

Is VU allocation in non-arrival-rate ever important? If so, we could just add it to the doc later.

Either way, I choose these new titles, ranked by preference. You can pick and that's what will go with:
1. VU allocation.
2. VU pre-allocation
3. Arrival-rate VU allocation

Reviewer: > because that should include Graceful stop and maybe more

graceful stop is not specific to arrival-rate executors and already has its own dedicated page that explains it: https://k6.io/docs/using-k6/scenarios/graceful-stop/

> Is VU allocation in non-arrival-rate ever important? If so, we could just add it to the doc later.

Well, considering the configuration of non-arrival-rate executors is specified in terms of VUs, there isn't really anything complicated to explain there :sweat_smile: 

Again, the complexity with arrival-rate is not just how VUs are allocated, but how to balance the VUs and the desired rate and how to find the right values for the former based on the latter and on iteration duration.

Author: > Again, the complexity with arrival-rate is not just how VUs are allocated, but how to balance the VUs and the desired rate and how to find the right values for the former based on the latter and on iteration duration.

Is this not encompassed in `VU Pre-allocation`? Basically, I'm looking for the shortest way to say the most in the most accurate way.

Reviewer: "VU Pre-allocation" only makes sense to you because you already know it applies for arrival-rate executors. A new user won't know that fact and won't click on that menu entry at all, even if this is exactly the information they are looking for.

excerpt: How k6 allocates VUs in the open-model, arrival-rate executors
---

This document explains how k6 allocates VUs in the arrival-rate executors.

In arrival-rate executors, three properties determine the iterations per second:

> -  `rate`  determines how many iterations k6 starts.

Reviewer: Some more explanation is probably needed here :thinking: Something like this? Or is this too much?

```suggestion
The desired load in scenarios with arrival-rate executors is not configured in terms of how many VUs will loop through the iteration code in parallel. Instead, we need to specify at what interval k6 should try to start a new iteration, regardless of how many other iterations (and VUs) are currently running - the so-called ["open model"](/using-k6/scenarios/about-scenarios/open-vs-closed/#open-model). Or, put another way, we need to specify how many iterations per second (or per minute, hour, etc.) k6 should try and start.

Still, iterations need VUs to run on and k6 VUs, like other JavaScript runtimes, are single-threaded and can only run a single iteration (with its event loop) at any given time. This makes configuring scenarios with arrival-rate executors more complicated. We need to configure both the desired load, and to ensure we have enough pre-allocated initialized VUs to handle it. Which may be tricky to calculate, considering that the iteration duration depends entirely on what the script does and how quickly or slowly the system-under-test (SUT) responds. Slower SUT means slower iterations, which means more VUs will be needed, since some will be busy with running old iterations.

You can specify the desired arrival rate with the `rate` and `timeUnit` scenario options - k6 will try to start `rate` iterations evenly spread across a `timeUnit` (default `1s`) interval of time. So, given a scenario with a `constant-arrival-rate` executor and `rate: 10`, k6 will try to start one iteration every 100 milliseconds. However, if the scenario had `rate: 10, timeUnit: '1m'`, k6 will try to start a new iteration every 6 seconds.

VUs can be configured via the `preAllocatedVUs` option - it sets the number of VUs k6 will initialize before the test runs. There is also the `maxVUs` option, which allows k6 to initialize VUs mid-test, though that is mostly useful during development and generally is a bad practice to use in actual tests. VU initialization is somewhat CPU intensive and doing it in the middle of the test could potentially interfere with test execution or skew results.
```

> This document explains how k6 allocates VUs in the arrival-rate executors.
> 
> In arrival-rate executors, three properties determine the iterations per second:
> -  `rate`  determines how many iterations k6 starts.
> - `timeUnit` determines how frequently it starts the number of iterations.
> - `preAllocatedVUs` sets the number of VUs to use to reach the target iterations per second.
> 
> In short, while `rate` and `timeUnit` set the target iterations per second, **you must allocate enough VUs to reach this target.**
> By pre-allocating VUs, k6 can initialize the VUs necessary for the test before the test runs,
> which ensures that the CPU cost of allocation doesn't interfere with test execution.

Reviewer: Some more explanation is probably needed here :thinking: Something like this?

```suggestion
The desired load in scenarios with arrival-rate executors is not configured in terms of how many VUs will loop through the iteration code in parallel. Instead, we need to specify at what interval k6 should try to start a new iteration, regardless of how many other iterations (and VUs) are currently running - the so-called ["open model"](/using-k6/scenarios/about-scenarios/open-vs-closed/#open-model). Or, put another way, we need to specify how many iterations per second (or per minute, hour, etc.) k6 should try and start.

Still, iterations need VUs to run on and k6 VUs, like other JavaScript runtimes, are single-threaded and can only run a single iteration (with its event loop) at any given time. This makes configuring scenarios with arrival-rate executors more complicated. We need to configure both the desired load, and to ensure we have enough pre-allocated initialized VUs to handle it. Which may be tricky to calculate, considering that the iteration duration depends entirely on what the script does and how quickly or slowly the system-under-test (SUT) responds. Slower SUT means slower iterations, which means more VUs will be needed, since some will be busy with running old iterations.

You can specify the desired arrival rate with the `rate` and `timeUnit` scenario options - k6 will try to start `rate` iterations evenly spread across a `timeUnit` (default `1s`) interval of time. So, given a scenario with a `constant-arrival-rate` executor and `rate: 10`, k6 will try to start one iteration every 100 milliseconds. However, if the scenario had `rate: 10, timeUnit: '1m'`, k6 will try to start a new iteration every 6 seconds.

VUs can be configured via the `preAllocatedVUs` option - it sets the number of VUs k6 will initialize before the test runs. There is also the `maxVUs` option, which allows k6 to initialize VUs mid-test, though that is mostly useful during development and generally is a bad practice to use in actual tests. VU initialization is somewhat CPU intensive and doing it in the middle of the test could potentially interfere with test execution or skew results.
```

Author: My initial thought is that the info is good...but dense.

One thing, I see that I was just wrong to type per second, it should be iteration rate.

 I also think a short bulleted intro should stay. Maybe not. This creates a [progressive disclosure](https://www.nngroup.com/articles/progressive-disclosure/), where readers who quickly scan could get the minimal info they need. Opening with four paragraphs in a row might scare many off.
 
 I've tried to synthesize your text and mine with:
 https://github.com/grafana/k6-docs/pull/974/commits/977c45d34e25c0defb079ef2c9f7bbb1e7279a24
 
 I wrote it sleepy, need to proofread, but let me know what you think.

Reviewer: bullet points are fine, except when they force you to unnecessarily break up explanations so much that they stop making sense and are harder to understand, e.g. https://github.com/grafana/k6-docs/pull/974/files#r1069127202

> This document explains how k6 allocates VUs in the arrival-rate executors.
> 
> In arrival-rate executors, three properties determine the iterations per second:
> -  `rate`  determines how many iterations k6 starts.
> - `timeUnit` determines how frequently it starts the number of iterations.
> - `preAllocatedVUs` sets the number of VUs to use to reach the target iterations per second.
> 
> In short, while `rate` and `timeUnit` set the target iterations per second, **you must allocate enough VUs to reach this target.**
> By pre-allocating VUs, k6 can initialize the VUs necessary for the test before the test runs,
> which ensures that the CPU cost of allocation doesn't interfere with test execution.

Author: ```suggestion
In arrival-rate executors, as long as k6 has VUs available, it starts iterations according to your target rate.
The ability to set iteration rate comes with a bit more configuration complexity: you must pre-allocate a sufficient number of VUs.
In other words, before the tests runs, you must both:
- Configure load (as iteration per unit of time)
- Ensure that you've scheduled enough VUs.

Read on to learn about how k6 allocates VUs in the arrival-rate executors.

## Pre-allocation in arrival-rate executors

As [open-model](/using-k6/scenarios/about-scenarios/open-vs-closed/#open-model) scenarios, arrival-rate executors start iterations according to a configured rate.
For example, you can configure arrival-rate executors to start 10 iterations each second, or minute, or hour.
This behavior is opposed to the closed-model scenarios, in which VUs wait for one iteration to finish before starting another

Each iteration need needs a VU to run it.
Because k6 VUs are single threaded, like other JS runtimes, a VU can only run the event loop of a single iteration at a time.
To ensure you have enough, you must pre-allocate a sufficient number.

In your arrival-rate configuration, three properties determine the iteration rate:
- `rate` determines how many iterations k6 starts.
- `timeUnit` determines how frequently it starts the number of iterations.
- `preAllocatedVUs` sets the number of VUs to use to reach the target iterations per second.
In practice, determining the right number of iterations might take some trial and error,
as the necessary VUs entirely depends on how quickly the SUT can process iterations.
```

```javascript
export const options = {
  scenarios: {
    constant_load: {
      executor: "constant-arrival-rate",
      preAllocatedVUs: 4,
      rate: 8,
      timeUnit: "1m",
    },
  },
};
```

<Blockquote mod="attention" title="">

> In cloud tests, **both `preAllocatedVUs` and `maxVUs` count against your subscription.**

Author: I don't want to move the whole block down, because it's in an admonition and I think it's most respectful if we alert readers about things that can affect subscription use up front. But I'll move your addition to that section.

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/47385188/212163638-0265b06b-1a8a-49e9-abe6-d6cc9d81bbfb.png)

> In cloud tests, **both `preAllocatedVUs` and `maxVUs` count against your subscription.**

Reviewer: I just realized this might be confusing in another way, "both `preAllocatedVUs` and `maxVUs` count against your subscription" may confuse users that `preAllocatedVUs + maxVUs` will be counted against their subscription, while the reality is that just the bigger number between the two (i.e. `max(preAllocatedVUs, maxVUs)`) will be counted.

And, given that `maxVUs` will always be `>= preAllocatedVUs`, and if you don't specify `maxVUs` explicitly, it's implicitly equal to `maxVUs`, `maxVUs` is what will be counted against the subscription

> In cloud tests, **both `preAllocatedVUs` and `maxVUs` count against your subscription.**

Author: Maybe:

> The number of VUs you allocate (including `maxVUs`) counts against your subscription.

---
title: VU allocation
excerpt: How k6 allocates VUs in the open-model, arrival-rate executors
---

This document explains how k6 allocates VUs in the arrival-rate executors.

In arrival-rate executors, three properties determine the iterations per second:

> - The `rate` property determines how many iterations k6 starts,
> - `timeUnit` determines how frequently it starts the number of iterations
> - `preAllocatedVUs` sets the number of VUs to use to reach the target iterations per second

Author: ```suggestion
-  `rate`  determines how many iterations k6 starts.
- `timeUnit` determines how frequently it starts the number of iterations.
- `preAllocatedVUs` sets the number of VUs to use to reach the target iterations per second.
```

You should probably add a number of extra iterations.
The amount necessary for your case may require some experimentation.

## You probably don't need `maxVUs`

The arrival-rate executors also have a `maxVUs` property.
If you set it, k6 runs in this sequence:
1. Pre-allocate the `preAllocatedVUs`.
1. Run the test, trying to reach the target iteration rate.
1. If the target exceeds the available VUs, allocate another VU.
1. If the target still exceeds available VUs, continue allocating VUs until reaching the number set by `maxVUs`.

Though it seems convenient, you should avoid using `maxVUs` in most cases.
Allocating VUs has CPU and memory costs, and allocating VUs as the test runs **can overload the load generator and skew results**.
If you're running in k6 Cloud, the `maxVUs` will count against your subscription.
In almost all cases, the best thing to do is to pre-allocate the number of VUs you need beforehand.

Some of the times it might make sense to use `maxVUs` include:
- To determine necessary allocation in first-time tests

> - To add a little "cushion" to an expected baseline `maxVUs`

Author: ```suggestion
- To add a little "cushion" to the pre-allocated VUs that you expect the test needs
```

> - For huge, highly distributed tests, in which you need to carefully scale load generators as you increment VUs.

Author: ```suggestion
- In huge, highly distributed tests, in which you need to carefully scale load generators as you increment VUs.
```
